A BODY OF DIVINITY
Contained in Sermons upon the Westminster Assembly's Catechism

By Thomas Watson (c. 1620–1686)

CHAPTER I
WHAT IS THE CHIEF END OF MAN?

Man's chief end is to glorify God, and to enjoy Him for ever.

The two main things man was made for are, to glorify God, and to enjoy God. Here are man's two
great ends: the first is subordinate to the second—we glorify God, that we may enjoy Him.

I. THE FIRST END OF MAN: TO GLORIFY GOD

Glorifying God consists in four things: (1) Appreciation. To glorify God is to set God highest in
our thoughts, and to have a venerable esteem of Him. "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory
and honour and power" (Rev. iv. 11). The angels in heaven, who see God in His full splendour and
magnificence, think no being like Him, no glory comparable to His: they are so taken up with
admiration and adoration of Him, that they cease not to give glory to God day and night.

(2) Adoration. To glorify God is to adore and worship Him. The seraphims cried, "Holy, holy,
holy, is the LORD of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory" (Isa. vi. 3). We adore God
for the infiniteness of His being, and His divine perfections. Glorifying God consists in
praising Him. David was in an ecstasy when he came to think of the glory of God: "Blessed be thy
glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise" (Neh. ix. 5).

(3) Affection. To glorify God is to be God-lovers. They glorify God who say with David, "Whom
have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee" (Ps. lxxiii. 25).
When we love God with all our heart, and prize Him above all things—that other things are
loved only as they lead us to God—this is glorifying Him.

(4) Subjection. To glorify God is to walk with the holy angels in this lower world, whose will is
in perfect subordination to God's will. To glorify God is to subject all our faculties to God—our
understanding, to believe what God reveals; our will, to obey what God commands; our affections,
to be purified by the Spirit, and to be inflamed with love to God.

II. THE SECOND END OF MAN: TO ENJOY GOD

The second end of man is to enjoy God. This enjoyment of God begins here in this life in the
gracious communications of the Spirit. The soul, by having God's image renewed in it, and
receiving the firstfruits of the Spirit, does, in some measure, enjoy God here. But the full
and perfect enjoyment of God is reserved for heaven, where the saints shall have an uninterrupted
and everlasting enjoyment of God. "They shall see his face" (Rev. xxii. 4): this seeing of God
is not with the bodily eye—for God is a Spirit—but it is the beatific vision of God; the soul
being divinely illuminated, shall have a clear, full, satisfying sight of God.

The saints shall enjoy God in His perfections. In heaven we shall see the wisdom, holiness,
and love of God unfolded to us; and this sight will fill us with the highest joy and felicity.

Oh, then, what a blessed thing it is to have God for our portion! What can be wanting where God
is enjoyed? He is an infinite good, and contains in Himself all good. He who enjoys God has
honour—he is heir to a kingdom. He has pleasure—for at God's right hand are pleasures for
evermore (Ps. xvi. 11). He has that which will satisfy him; not that the soul can comprehend God,
but it shall apprehend Him; and being full of God, what would it have more?

QUESTION: How may we glorify God?

I. We glorify God by sincerely aiming at His glory. We must not act with a side-wind; our design
must be God's glory. "Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God" (1 Cor. x. 31). A hypocrite may sometimes do that which is materially good, but
not with a right end. He relieves the poor—not to glorify God, but to be seen of men; he prays—
but it is not to have communion with God, but that he may be thought holy. It is the end that
graces the action. When the soul says, "In this duty or service I perform, I aim chiefly at God's
glory," then it glorifies God.

II. We glorify God by a humble and entire resignation of ourselves to Him. When we give ourselves
up to God—when we say to God, as the woman said to Elijah, "Behold, thou hast all—I am wholly
thine, Lord; my head to be bowed down before Thee, my heart to love Thee, my tongue to extol
Thee, my hands to serve Thee"—this is glorifying God. The soul that is thus wholly given up to
God is a temple where God delights to dwell, and where He will show Himself glorious.

III. We glorify God by doing all the good we can in our places and relations. God is glorified
when His children walk holily and exemplarily in their places—when they carry the beauty and
savour of the gospel along with them in all their conversations and callings. Hast thou an estate?
Improve it for God. Hast thou a talent? Employ it for God. Hast thou time? Spend it for God.
Every talent is a debt owing to God: God will account with thee how thou hast employed it;
therefore glorify God with all thou hast.
